## Age-related epithelial defects limit thymic function and regeneration 

### SUMMARY

Despite its importance for generating a broad repertoire of naïve T cells, thymic function declines precipitously with age. The thymus is also extremely sensitive to acute damage such as the conditioning required for hematopoietic cell transplant (HCT). Although harboring a tremendous endogenous capacity for repair, this ability diminishes with age and thymic function can be prognostic of HCT outcomes. The mechanisms underlying thymic involution and regeneration remain poorly understood. Using single-cell and spatial transcriptomics, lineage-tracing, and advanced imaging, here we report the age-associated emergence of unique thymic epithelial cell states linked with tissue degeneration. Age-associated (aa)TECs formed atypical high-density epithelial clusters that were devoid of thymocytes; representing an accretion of non-functional thymic tissue that worsened with age and exhibited features of partial epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). The accumulation of aaTECs in the involuted thymus was exacerbated by acute injury and was associated with diminished regenerative capacity compared to young mice, largely by drawing tonic signals from other TEC and acting as a “sink” for epithelial regeneration cues such as FGF and BMP signaling. These structural and functional changes to the thymic epithelium could be linked to molecular changes in the fibroblast compartment, and specifically their age-related upregulation of programs associated with inflammaging. Our findings define a key feature of the aged, involuted thymus that compromises organ function and restricts regenerative capacity after acute injury. Boosting thymic function in aged individuals could improve outcomes following HCT as well as where improved adaptive immune responses are required, such as vaccines and cancer immunotherapies6,8. This newly described feature of the aged thymus limiting its functional capacity and responses to regenerative cues could therefore have profound implications for the development of therapeutic strategies to improve thymic function in aged individuals.
<hr>

This repository includes Jupyter notebooks adapted from the [shunPykeR](https://github.com/kousaa/shunPykeR) GitHub repository that accompany this publication.

Processed data to be used with these notebooks have been deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) under accession code:[GEO######](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GEO######).
